The three key outcomes of project closure are the following.
The first, meet.
Did you meet your project's success criteria?
Transfer.
Did you transfer responsibility?
And lastly, thank or thank everyone, acknowledge contributions.
Let's go into each three of these in detail to be sure we understand those.
The first,
did you meet the project's success criteria and meet customer's expectations?
If not, you will have difficulty closing or ending the project.
And secondly, is the project actually done if you have not done this?
Next, transfer responsibility.
Be sure you consider in your project plan who will own and be
responsible and operate the project deliverables.
And how will that transition happen?
If you haven't thought of this, you may have difficulty again ending the project.
Add items to your WBS back in project planning for the transfer of activities.
Now if this transfer is really big or hard or complex,
then I would suggest adding another mini plan to your
project control section of your overall plan.
I have seen cases where a ton of hard work went into a project only to
be unappreciated or accepted by the customer or users when the
transition either didn't happen on time or properly.
Guess what?
You are the PM and are responsible for this.
And lastly,
thank and acknowledge all contributions by all of the
participants during the project closure.
And also close out the accounting, resource, legal, contract, and other items.
And we're going to talk about more of those in our
checklist slide coming up soon.
Sometimes closing a project can be kind of tough.
Before you know it,
you get assigned to the next project before you've had
time to close the one you were on.
Hang in there and push for closure.
It will be good for your career and the customer.
Now is this worth doing, project closure?
Sometimes companies do not see this step as adding any value.
If you are rated or evaluated by your project's performance,
you better do a project closure so you can complete and document your successes.
You might be missing a transition plan.
That WBS we talked about in project planning,
that needs to include additional tasks that would
account for transitioning your project.
Now it may be as simple as moving the app,
or system, etc., over to an operations team,
but how?
You will likely need documentation, training,
mentoring, maybe even additional staff.
Lastly, lessons learned can be painful.
Sometimes projects don't go very well.
There are many people issues or things people basically goof up.
This is where a strong leader like yourself or a quality executive
can lead and facilitate the closure process,
so that you can learn and gain valuable lessons for future projects.
And remember,
the past is where you learn the lesson and the future is where you apply the lesson.